>> Kyle Simpson: I wanna dig
in a little bit more and
try to evolve our understanding
of function purity even further.
Here's a function foo that takes a direct
input x and it references a variable
y from outside of itself, it's using
a const y, we're gonna get to const later.
But let's just say for now const creates
a y that is not going to ever be changed.
So my question to you is based on our
current understanding of function
purity is foo a pure function?
>> Speaker 2: I'm going to say no.
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay, so I'm hearing no.
We'll ask you to explain that no in
a moment, does anybody disagree and
think that it is a pure function?
>> Kyle Simpson: It's not, because it's
relying on something not being passed in.
So based on our original definition the
red side of the rubiks cube we say that it
can access something
outside of it self right?
But that second definition
I just gave you was .well
actually the important part of function
period could be more accurately stated as
given the same input we
always get the same output.
Given the same input here,
are we always gonna get the same output?
Is there anything that could happen to
this program that would prevent us from
getting two whenever we call one.
Whenever we call it with the value 1.
>> Speaker 2: Aside from someone
changing the value of y.
>> Kyle Simpson: No, I'm saying
given the state of this code, and
const y can't be reassigned.
So given the state of the code as written,
if we just called line 7 over,
over, and over again, is there anything
that could happen that would change
to make it not return the value to?
>> Speaker 2: Couldn't you execute that
function somewhere else in another script
or import a different script or
something like that where y has changed?
>> Kyle Simpson: Well fortunately,
we talked about lexical scope
in the deep JavaScript foundations course.
Lexical scope says, this foo as
written here will close over that y,
and that y is never going to change.
>> Kyle Simpson: So it doesn't matter if
we passed foo around as an event handler
or whatever,
it's closed over that exact y.
>> Kyle Simpson: There's nothing about
this program as written that could happen
at runtime that would change
the behavior of line 7.
Going to run that way every single
time from that perspective,
from the blue side of the rubics cube
then, foo acts as a pure function.
What about this code, we have a foo
function that calls bar with x, and
bar takes in an input and
computes an output and returns it.
>> Kyle Simpson: Let's first ask,
is bar a peer function?
Yes.
>> Kyle Simpson: Somebody tell
me why bar is a pure function.
>> Speaker 2: Cuz it's not usually
in the [INAUDIBLE] side scope.
>> Kyle Simpson: That's
one way of stating it but
what's our new evolved definition for
a pure function?
>> Speaker 3: It will return
the same thing every time it's run.
>> Kyle Simpson: Given a bar
function written like that,
if I pump in the value 11,
I'm always gonna get 12 out right?
So given the same inputs I'm always
gonna get the same output, so
if bar is pure that's a good start.
Cuz if bar was not pure we could
immediately say that foo is not pure.
Bar's pure, now let's talk about foo,
is foo satisfying our
definition of function purity?
>> Kyle Simpson: Given
what we see written here,
every time I call foo with value one,
I'm always gonna get value two out right?
As a matter of fact there's really only
one thing that could possibly change here
that would effect the would
be if somebody redefined bar.
If somebody took the identifier bar and
redefined it to point to
a different function,
all of a sudden we get a different output.
We do not see that happening so
given what we can see in this program.
The function foo is satisfying out
definition of function purity.
>> Kyle Simpson: But this is starting
to introduce, and this should feel
uncomfortable, I'm actually intentionally
creating something for you to rustle with.
So don't feel like you're the weird
one out that doesn't understand
what's going on.
This is intentional,
I'm trying to create some tension here, so
that you have to wrestle
with this concept.
Our initial definition would've
told us it's impure cause'
it references a variable
outside of itself.
Our evolved addition says,
well it's observably pure.
If we were to take the original definition
in it's strictest sense, that would
mean that every single function would not
only have to have all its inputs, but
any function it used would
also have to be an input.
That could get rather onerous
pretty quickly, right?
If one function couldn't
call another function, so
I believe in the spirit
of what we're doing here.
We're evolving our understanding
of functional purity closer and
closer to what a functional
programmer says is functional purity.
And here we observe that we are still
consistent with that in that foo will
always produce value two
if given the value one.
>> Kyle Simpson: Now it is
technically possible for
somebody to rewrite the bar function.
Some people do that if you've ever looked
at the internals of lowdash for example,
they rewrite functions, they hotswap in.
Compile versions of functions and
do all kinds of tricks for performance and
stuff, I never rewrite
functions in my program.
I just, as a rule of thumb,
never ever ever do that.
I don't care that I could squeak out
another microsecond of performance or
something, I just don't rewrite functions.
I treat functions as
if they are constants,
as if they are things that
will not be redefined.
So in my code you'll never gonna find
that function getting re written there at
runtime to a different definition.
You're not gonna find that
in my application code and
therefore in my application code
where you to see this pattern,
you can reasonably trust the bar
if going to add for the constant.
and given what we see in the program, we
clearly do not see bar being rewritten, so
therefore, we can trust it.
Is it a 100 percent, iron clad guarantee,
I don't know about that and
here's the point that I'm trying to make.
Function purity in a mutable system like
JavaScript Is not actually
a binary characteristic.
You cannot say something is 100% pure or
100% impure.
Well, you might be able to
say it's 100% impure, but
you definitely cannot say, for
virtually any function, for
the vast majority of functions you
can't actually say it is pure.
What you actually have to say is Purity
is a confidence level, it's a range.
Do I have a strong degree of confidence
that foo is going to act pure?
I would say I have a very strong
degree of confidence given
what I see here in this code.
Would you agree with that?
Would you understand
where I'm coming from?
That it's a strong degree of confidence.
I'm gonna leave myself a little window
there, that it is technically possible for
somebody to do some kind of
crazy thing and write a macro or
something that changes what functions
do or some crazy thing like maybe.
But given what I see in this program,
I'm pretty confident that
fools gonna behave as pure.
What about this code?
>> Kyle Simpson: Here foo in pass
in a function called bar and
I return an new function back and
that new function takes in an x and
when it receives the x it calls
the original bar with it.
>> Kyle Simpson: So my foo down on line
seven takes in a function callback.
Returns us back a function and then
that second set of parenthesis on line
nine executes the return function passing
in the value three as the parameter x.
And we get three coming in as
the parameter v on line 7 doubled,
gets returned back and
we get the value 6 as the output.
>> Kyle Simpson: So my question here is,
given what we now know about function
purity, is foo a pure function?
>> Kyle Simpson: There's actually
two questions to ask here,
was wondering if anybody would catch it.
Foo itself is a thing that given some
function it just returns another function.
So the first question is given any
given function that we pass into foo,
are we always gonna get
back another function
that's wrapped around it
in exactly the same way.
Line two creates a function that wraps
around whatever bar we pass in, and
that function is what we return back.
So if I didn't have those parentheses set
on line nine, and I just called foo, and
I called it over and
over again with that exact same function.
Is the resulting coming back always
going to be exactly the same structure?
>> Kyle Simpson: I have a high
degree of confidence, so
you better not tell me yes or no anymore.
Because there is no yes or no here, there
is a, I have a high degree of confidence,
I have a low degree of confidence,
I have a mid degree of confidence.
Pick whatever scale you wanna use, but
in a mutable environment like JavaScript,
there's virtually no
such thing as 100% pure.
>> Kyle Simpson: So we could say foo
is pretty much always gonna return it.
Now given that output function.
The one from line two that we
are calling on line nine- Is that
output function pure?
There are two functions to ask that about.
We're now asking about the second one-
the one we can pass in the value three
as the parameter x.
Is that one pure?
>> Kyle Simpson: If that one
was closed over a bar, and
we gave some x value of 3 to it,
are we always gonna get back 6?
>> Speaker 2: I have a high degree
of confidence that we will.
>> Kyle Simpson: , You have a high degree
of confidence that's the correct answer.
Okay, this is a strong degree
of confidence that these,
both of these functions
are behaving as pure okay,
>> Kyle Simpson: What about this function?
>> Kyle Simpson: I mean I'd say with
a high deal of confidence that it would
return the same based on the input,
that you will get the same output.
If we gave it the same object structure
every time, do you we feel like
it's always gonna extract the id property
and give us that same id value back?
>> Speaker 2: Yes.
So, you would say I have a relatively
high degree of confidence?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Kyle Simpson: What is I give it
an object where id is a getter
that returns a random number?
>> Kyle Simpson: Now where's
your confidence level?
>> Speaker 2: [LAUGH]
>> Kyle Simpson: Shattered.
>> Kyle Simpson: [LAUGH] Shattered.
I should have put that word on the slide,
shattered.
[COUGH]
I'm trying to make a point
here that you have to look at
what you are given on a code.
And judge for yourselves what
degree of confidence you have.
I'm deliberately doing
something weird here
to push it to the edge to where it doesn't
behave the way we might have assumed.
But you cannot look at something in
isolation in a language like JavaScript.
You have to look at the full
context to make those decisions.
If you look only at line two You'll
come up with the wrong conclusion, and
you'll have a high degree of confidence
and then you'll get bitten by it.
And you'll be like, my world just fell
apart, my world just shattered, okay.
Looking at the whole context of
what we're given in the program,
that's how we need to judge
can I trust this code or not.
The whole purpose of our asking about
function purity is, can we trust it?
Cuz if we can't trust it,
we can't understand it,
you know how we talked
about side effects before?
Guess what another side effect is?
Randomness, randomness is a side effect,
it's a side cause, but
it's a side effect, timestamps
>> Speaker 2: Those are side effects
because, you call it over and over again,
eventually your time
stamp is going to change.